So we've seen what actions are, let's now discuss filters. Filters give you the ability to change data during the
code execution.
The difference between actions and filters is that in actions as we saw, we can run whatever PHP functions
we like. We can change global variables. We can echo something
and all the script we would like to run. In filters however, you get an input, you modify it, you return
it. And that's it. You're not allowed to change any global variables or to echo anything.
Or in other words the functions should not have any side effects, should be a pure functions. Just get an
input and return an output.
So let's start coding now and you will see what I mean.
So WordPress actually recommends using filters in any place in your theme where you use some text like
here for example.
So what we would like to do and what filters allow us to do is to allow other developers to modify this
string, if they needed without actually getting into your code.
So to do that like the do_action() function, this one is called apply_filters().
And it gets also the filter name which should be prefixed.
So "_themename".
Let's call it "no_posts_text".
And the second argument is the thing that we would like to filter. So right now this function will just
output this function. It will output "Sorry no posts
match your criteria."
So let's actually, you know, type any text here in order to get this text.
And let's now add a filter. So in functions I'll create a new function "no_posts_text". Of course in real life you should
prefix your functions.
And than it will receive the
the actual text, which is this one by default.
And what you can do is you can modify this text and then return a new one.
So what we can do is "return $text" and let's append  to it some.
And now let's add_filter(), same like add_action(), takes the filter name which we called "_themename_no_posts_text"
and the function name, the function which we will use to filter. And let's also text the priority and the accepted
arguments like the actions. So let's see what would happen now.
So looks like we've done something wrong.
All right, ok. Now we don't need to escape HTML and echo. We apply filters as a function so it accepts
an argument not an echoed string, right? So just echo here and pass the text.
I missed an "_".
So now it should work. The original one and then the appended text. But in this sort of situation we probably have to
return a new text completely.
We don't need to modify it. So you can simply just do something like this.
"No posts". And it will work fine.
However you should let other developers that will use these filters know that you need the filter
result to be also escaped and translated.
So it's the responsibility for the other developer to actually add this call and then add the text domain
for his theme, which will be a child theme. We'll get into this in a moment. So this will probably be called
"something" and then "-child". This should be a text domain other than your theme text domain. So
this will also work.
However it will be escaped and translated properly. So whenever you use filters and you intend your theme
to be used by other developers just let them know in the documentation,
you know, the proper way to use your filters. All right.
The similar to actions
filters also
WordPress also includes some filters that will filter things in the WordPress core.
So let's for example filter the post title.
So let's create a function called
"filter_title()"
and this one will receive the "$title"
and return filtered one. So let's do "Filtered "
and then the $title.
And add_filter().
And this filter is called "the_title" and the function is "filter_title".
So let's see.
Let's go back to the index and.
And as you can see we have "Filtered " and then the post title. I just want to do something real quick here.
Let's remove this background.
You know, in order to see better.
Yeah, that's much good.
So I think that it for filters for now.
So just one more thing that's "filter reference".
And like the actions we have a list of all filters that you can use with WordPress.
Pretty much anything you want to filter you will find the filter for it here.
Just Google it and you will probably find something.